Add documentation for interleaved memory allocation (#2088)
oneapi-src/oneTBB: doc/main/reference/numa_interleaved_allocation.rst

.. _numa_interleaved_allocation:

API to allocate memory interleaved between NUMA nodes

> =====================================================

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Allocate Memory Interleaved between NUMA Nodes
==============================================
```

.. note::
    To enable this feature, set the ``TBB_PREVIEW_NUMA_ALLOCATION`` macro to 1. When available and enabled,
    the feature-test macro ``TBB_HAS_NUMA_ALLOCATION`` is defined.

.. contents::
    :local:
    :depth: 2

Description
***********

A well-known method to improve performance on NUMA systems is to interleave memory between several NUMA
nodes. There are two parameters that control the interleaving: the set of NUMA nodes across which memory is
allocated and the chunk size used for interleaving. The first parameter allows users to select a subset of
NUMA nodes, which may be desirable if a parallel algorithm uses only part of the available NUMA nodes. The
second parameter controls the granularity of interleaving, which may be desirable to optimize for specific
access patterns. The allocation/deallocation functions call the OS directly. If some form of caching is

> desirable, it can be implemented on top of this API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
second parameter controls the granularity of interleaving, which may be desirable to optimize for specific
access patterns.

The allocated memory is filled with zeros and aligned to the system page size. It is not cached
and is returned back immediately upon deallocation.
```

Author: > The allocated memory is filled with zeros and aligned to the system page size.

This is mentioned in the description of allocation functions as well. It seems it's more natural when we describe the functions, not in "general overview".

> It is not cached and is returned back immediately upon deallocation.

Probably it's unclear where the memory is returned. And in your version we say nothing about memory acquiring.

Reviewer: I think you have said everything about how the memory is obtained in the subsequent paragraph that mentions libnuma, malloc, and WinAPI.

So the key change I propose above is to make the note about absence of caching clear and concise. The other note about zero-filling and alignment serves as a segue, as well as helps to make a useful new paragraph, separate from the description of parameters. I do not mind repeating it later.

I also would not mind another way to rephrase the part about absence of caching.

Reviewer: Or maybe the note about immediate return could be moved to the description of `deallocate_numa_interleaved`.

Author: Can it be

```
...second parameter controls the granularity of interleaving, which may be desirable to optimize for 
specific access patterns.

An allocated memory is not cached und not splitted. It's returned back to OS immediately upon
deallocation.
```

Reviewer: I do not think it is accurate to say it is returned to OS. If libnuma or malloc is used as the intermediate API, how do we know that it is returned to OS?

Again, I think the important information is that the memory is not cached by TBB but returned immediately (to the layer it was obtained from).

Author: Thanks for the discussion, I agree. We definitely do not want to dive into the discussion about "but on MacOs.,." or prohibit possible future optimization "on no-NUMA machine we always use malloc()". So, it's turns out to

```
...second parameter controls the granularity of interleaving, which may be desirable to optimize for 
specific access patterns.

An allocated memory is not splitted und not cached. It's returned back immediately upon deallocation.
```

Author: Added. 

Also added 
```
Repeated IDs allow flexible load balancing between nodes.
```
to `allocate_numa_interleaved()` description.

.. note::
    By default, Docker environment blocks ``move_pages`` system call, which is used for interleaved memory
    allocation. For successive allocation, this syscall must be unblocked.

API
***

Header
------

.. code:: cpp

    #define TBB_PREVIEW_NUMA_ALLOCATION 1
    #include <oneapi/tbb/numa_allocation.h>

Synopsis
--------

.. code:: cpp

    namespace oneapi {
        namespace tbb {
            inline void* allocate_numa_interleaved(size_t bytes,
                                                   const std::vector<tbb::numa_node_id>& nodes,
                                                   size_t bytes_per_chunk = 0);

            inline void* allocate_numa_interleaved(size_t bytes, size_t bytes_per_chunk = 0);

            inline void deallocate_numa_interleaved(void* ptr, size_t bytes);
        } // namespace tbb
    } // namespace oneapi

Functions
---------

.. cpp:function:: void* allocate_numa_interleaved(size_t bytes, const std::vector<tbb::numa_node_id>& nodes, \
                  size_t bytes_per_chunk = 0)

    **Returns:** Allocated memory interleaved between specified NUMA ``nodes`` with interleaved chunk size of

>     ``bytes_per_chunk``. In case of allocation failure or invalid arguments, returns ``nullptr``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    **Returns:** The address of a memory block interleaved between the specified NUMA ``nodes`` in chunks of 
    ``bytes_per_chunk``. In case of allocation failure or invalid arguments, returns ``nullptr``.
```

Author: Both C++ standard and Linux man for `malloc` use wording "return a pointer to". Can we also follow this practice? So, can it be like

**Returns:** A pointer to the allocated memory interleaved between the specified NUMA ``nodes`` in chunks of 
    ``bytes_per_chunk``. In case of allocation failure or invalid arguments, returns ``nullptr``.

Reviewer: Works for me.

Author: Done.

Author: Done

    If ``nodes`` contains duplicates, the memory load is proportional to the number of occurrences of each
    node. ``nodes`` must not be empty. ``bytes_per_chunk`` must be a multiple of the system page size. If
    ``bytes_per_chunk`` is zero, a system page size is used. `bytes` must be non-zero. Allocated memory

>     contains zeros and is aligned to the system page size.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    **Requirements:** ``bytes`` must be non-zero, ``nodes`` must not be empty, and ``bytes_per_chunk``
    must be a multiple of the system page size.
    
    If ``nodes`` contains duplicate NUMA node IDs, each of these IDs independently participates
    in the interleaving order. If ``bytes_per_chunk`` is zero, the system page size is used.
    The allocated memory contains zeros and is aligned to the system page size.
```

    

.. cpp:function:: void* allocate_numa_interleaved(size_t bytes, size_t bytes_per_chunk = 0)

>     Same as the above but allocates memory from all available NUMA nodes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Same as the above, but allocates memory interleaved across all available NUMA nodes.
```

.. cpp:function:: void deallocate_numa_interleaved(void* ptr, size_t bytes)

    Deallocates memory allocated by ``allocate_numa_interleaved``. The behavior is undefined if ``bytes`` is
    not the same as the one passed to the corresponding allocation function, ``ptr`` was not

>     allocated by ``allocate_numa_interleaved`` or if the same pointer is deallocated more than once.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Deallocates memory allocated by ``allocate_numa_interleaved``.
    
    **Requirements:** ``ptr`` must be previously allocated by ``allocate_numa_interleaved`` and not yet
    deallocated, and ``bytes`` must be the same as the corresponding value used to allocate the memory.
    Otherwise, the behavior is undefined.
```

Example

> *******

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Examples
********
```

> The code below provides a simple example with direct use of interleaved memory allocation as arrays.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The code below provides a simple example with direct use of the allocated memory as a NUMA-interleaved array.
```

.. literalinclude:: ./examples/allocate_numa_interleaved_basic.cpp
    :language: c++
    :start-after: /*begin_allocate_numa_interleaved_example*/
    :end-before: /*end_allocate_numa_interleaved_example*/

In the following example, interleaved memory is wrapped in ``tbb::memory_pool``. This allows to amortize

> allocation overhead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the following example, interleaved memory is wrapped in ``tbb::memory_pool`` to amortize
allocation overhead for small objects.
```

                                                   size_t bytes_per_chunk = 0);

            inline void* allocate_numa_interleaved(size_t bytes, size_t bytes_per_chunk = 0);

            inline void deallocate_numa_interleaved(void* ptr, size_t bytes);
        } // namespace tbb
    } // namespace oneapi

Functions
---------

.. cpp:function:: void* allocate_numa_interleaved(size_t bytes, const std::vector<tbb::numa_node_id>& nodes, \
                  size_t bytes_per_chunk = 0)

    **Returns:** A pointer to the allocated memory interleaved between the specified NUMA ``nodes`` in chunks
    of ``bytes_per_chunk``. In case of allocation failure or invalid arguments, returns ``nullptr``.

    **Requirements:** ``bytes`` must be non-zero, ``nodes`` must not be empty, and ``bytes_per_chunk``
    must be a multiple of the system page size.
    
    If ``nodes`` contains duplicate NUMA node IDs, each of these IDs independently participates
    in the interleaving order. Repeated IDs allow flexible load balancing between nodes. If ``bytes_per_chunk``
    is zero, the system page size is used. The allocated memory contains zeros and is aligned to the system

>     page size.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    If ``nodes`` contains some NUMA node IDs more than once, each of these IDs independently
    participates in the interleaving order. That allows flexible load balancing between nodes.
    If ``bytes_per_chunk`` is zero, the system page size is used. The allocated memory contains zeros 
    and is aligned to the system page size.
```

    the feature-test macro ``TBB_HAS_NUMA_ALLOCATION`` is defined.

.. contents::
    :local:
    :depth: 2

Description
***********

A well-known method to improve performance on NUMA systems is to interleave memory between several NUMA
nodes. There are two parameters that control the interleaving: the set of NUMA nodes across which memory is
allocated and the chunk size used for interleaving. The first parameter allows users to select a subset of
NUMA nodes, which may be desirable if a parallel algorithm uses only part of the available NUMA nodes. The
second parameter controls the granularity of interleaving, which may be desirable to optimize for specific
access patterns. The allocation/deallocation functions call the OS directly. If some form of caching is
desirable, it can be implemented on top of this API.

API
***

Header
------

.. code:: cpp

    #define TBB_PREVIEW_NUMA_ALLOCATION 1
    #include <oneapi/tbb/numa_allocation.h>

Synopsis
--------

.. code:: cpp

    namespace tbb {
        inline void *allocate_numa_interleaved(size_t bytes,
                                       const std::vector<tbb::numa_node_id>& nodes,

>                                        size_t bytes_per_chunk = 0);

Reviewer 2: Aligh function parameters one by another?

```suggestion
        inline void *allocate_numa_interleaved(size_t bytes,
                                               const std::vector<tbb::numa_node_id>& nodes,
                                               size_t bytes_per_chunk = 0);
```

.. _numa_interleaved_allocation:

API to allocate memory interleaved between NUMA nodes
=====================================================

.. note::
    To enable this feature, set the ``TBB_PREVIEW_NUMA_ALLOCATION`` macro to 1. When available and enabled,

>     the feature-test macro ``TBB_HAS_NUMA_ALLOCATION`` is defined.

Reviewer 3: Please also update the `feature_test_macros.rst` page with the exact macro value and a link to this page.

Author: Thanks, missed that.

.. contents::
    :local:
    :depth: 2

Description
***********

A well-known method to improve performance on NUMA systems is to interleave memory between several NUMA
nodes. There are two parameters that control the interleaving: the set of NUMA nodes across which memory is
allocated and the chunk size used for interleaving. The first parameter allows users to select a subset of
NUMA nodes, which may be desirable if a parallel algorithm uses only part of the available NUMA nodes. The
second parameter controls the granularity of interleaving, which may be desirable to optimize for specific
access patterns. The allocation/deallocation functions call the OS directly. If some form of caching is
desirable, it can be implemented on top of this API.

> Under Linux, the API uses the ``libnuma`` library, which must be available at runtime. If the library is not

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Under Linux*, the API uses the ``libnuma`` library, which must be available at runtime. If the library is not
```

Reviewer 3: It may also make sense to make it a caution.

> available, the allocation functions fall back to standard memory allocation. On Windows, the API uses

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
available, the allocation functions fall back to standard memory allocation. On Windows*, the API uses
```

> functionality available starting from Windows 10 / Windows Server 2016; on older versions of Windows, the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
functionality available starting from Microsoft* Windows* 10 / Microsoft* Windows* Server 2016; on older versions of Microsoft* Windows*, the
```

allocation functions also fall back to standard memory allocation.

API
***

Header
------

.. code:: cpp

    #define TBB_PREVIEW_NUMA_ALLOCATION 1
    #include <oneapi/tbb/numa_allocation.h>

Synopsis
--------

.. code:: cpp

>     namespace tbb {

Reviewer 3: I guess `oneapi::tbb` namespace should be used, similarly to other reference pages

Author: Done.

        inline void *allocate_numa_interleaved(size_t bytes,
                                               const std::vector<tbb::numa_node_id>& nodes,
                                               size_t bytes_per_chunk = 0);

        inline void *allocate_numa_interleaved(size_t bytes, size_t bytes_per_chunk = 0);

        inline void deallocate_numa_interleaved(void *ptr, size_t bytes);
    } // namespace tbb

Functions
---------

> .. cpp:function:: void *tbb::allocate_numa_interleaved(size_t bytes, const std::vector<tbb::numa_node_id>& nodes, \

Reviewer 3: Other reference pages omit the namespace in the function description.
```suggestion
.. cpp:function:: void* allocate_numa_interleaved(size_t bytes, const std::vector<tbb::numa_node_id>& nodes, \
```

                  size_t bytes_per_chunk = 0)

    **Returns:** Allocated memory interleaved between specified NUMA ``nodes`` with interleaved chunk size of

>     ``bytes_per_chunk``. ``nodes`` can contain duplicates, in this case memory load is proportional to the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    ``bytes_per_chunk``. 
    
    If ``nodes`` contains duplicates, the memory load is proportional to the
```

    number of occurrences of each node. ``nodes`` must not be empty.

>     ``bytes_per_chunk`` must be a multiple of the system page size. If ``bytes_per_chunk`` is zero, a system

Reviewer 3: I would better use "undefined behavior" wording.

Something like a note: `The behavior is undefined if ``nodes`` is empty, or ``bytes_per_chunk`` is not a multiple of the system page size.`.

Author: Is that because we want to keep possibility in future to change behavior to e.g. throwing exceptions?

Currently the behavior is defined: we check and return `nullptr`. Contrary to `deallocate_numa_interleaved()` with invalid `bytes`, where the behavior is definitely undefined.

Reviewer 3: Sorry, missed that while reading for the first time.

>     ``bytes_per_chunk`` must be a multiple of the system page size. If ``bytes_per_chunk`` is zero, a system

Reviewer 3: Should we document what happens if `bytes`` is zero?

Author: Done.

    page size is used. Allocated memory contains zeros and is aligned to the system page size.

>     In case of allocation failure or invalid arguments, returns ``nullptr``.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    **Returns**: if the allocation succeeds, a pointer to the beginning of the memory region. ``nullptr`` otherwise.
```

Author: Is it clear enough from your suggestion that we return `nullptr` also in case of invalid arguments? I.e., not doing something undefined, not calling `abort()` etc?

.. cpp:function:: void *tbb::allocate_numa_interleaved(size_t bytes, size_t bytes_per_chunk = 0)

    Same as the above but allocates memory from all available NUMA nodes.

.. cpp:function:: void tbb::deallocate_numa_interleaved(void *ptr, size_t bytes)

>     **Effects:** Deallocates memory allocated by ``allocate_numa_interleaved``. ``bytes`` must be the same as

Reviewer 3: I would either use "Effects:" prefix for all three functions, or remove it in all places.

Author: `Effects:` add no value and only distract with bold font, so I'm for dropping it, if this is acceptable.

>     the one passed to the corresponding allocation function. The behavior is undefined if ``ptr`` was not

Reviewer 3: We may say that if ``bytes`` is not the same as the number passed to the corresponding allocation function, the behavior is undefined as well

Author: Done.

    allocated by ``allocate_numa_interleaved`` or if the same pointer is deallocated more than once.

Example
*******

The code below provides a simple example with direct use of interleaved memory allocation as arrays.

.. literalinclude:: ./examples/allocate_numa_interleaved_basic.cpp
    :language: c++
    :start-after: /*begin_allocate_numa_interleaved_example*/
    :end-before: /*end_allocate_numa_interleaved_example*/

> In this example, interleaved memory is wrapped in ``tbb::memory_pool``. This allows to amortize allocation

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the following example, interleaved memory is wrapped in ``tbb::memory_pool``. This allows to amortize allocation
```
